skills/pr-creation/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: pr-creation
description: Create and manage GitHub Pull Requests with templates, reviewers, and labels. Use when code is ready for review. Merging requires explicit approval.
license: MIT
compatibility: Requires GitHub CLI (gh) and repository write access
metadata:
  author: ximplicity
  version: "1.0"
  category: git
---

# Pull Request Creation Skill

Create and manage Pull Requests on GitHub.

## Allowed Operations

- Create pull requests
- Update PR description
- Add reviewers
- Add labels
- Request reviews
- View PR status
- View PR comments

## Forbidden Operations

These require explicit approval:

- Merge PRs
- Close PRs without merging
- Delete branches after merge
- Modify PR settings
- Force-approve PRs

## Constraints

- PRs must have a description
- PRs must reference issue/feature ID
- PRs should have at least one reviewer
- Use draft PRs for work-in-progress

## PR Template

```markdown
## Summary

[Brief description of changes]

## Related Issue

Closes: PROJ-123

## Changes

- [Change 1]
- [Change 2]

## Testing

- [ ] Unit tests pass
- [ ] Integration tests pass
- [ ] Manual testing completed

## Checklist

- [ ] Code follows project style
- [ ] Documentation updated
- [ ] No secrets committed
```

## Dry-Run Mode

When `dryRun: true`:

- Validate all PR fields
- Check branch exists
- Verify reviewers exist
- Show PR preview
- Make NO API calls

## Linking

- Link to Jira issues using issue key
- Link to related PRs if applicable
- Reference relevant documentation

## Example Usage

```
Create a PR for branch feature/PROJ-123-login
Add reviewers @alice and @bob to PR #45
Update PR #45 description with test results
Show status of my open PRs
```

Commit message:

feat(skills): add progressive disclosure with MANIFEST.yaml and references
Implement three-level progressive disclosure for all skills:
- Level 1: Metadata (~120 tokens) - name + description
- Level 2: Instructions (~1600 tokens) - SKILL.md body
- Level 3: Resources (on-demand) - references/ directory

Each skill now includes:
- MANIFEST.yaml with token estimates and loading hints
- references/ directory with detailed documentation
- Streamlined SKILL.md with links to references

Token estimation rule: 1 token ≈ 0.75 words in English
Cheatsheets/examples use higher estimates due to formatting overhead

Skills updated:
- jira-read: JQL-CHEATSHEET.md, ERROR-HANDLING.md
- jira-write: TRANSITIONS-GUIDE.md, FIELD-REFERENCE.md
- git-operations: BRANCH-NAMING.md, COMMIT-CONVENTIONS.md
- orchestration: PLAN-EXAMPLES.md, ROLLBACK-STRATEGIES.md
- pr-creation: PR-TEMPLATES.md, REVIEW-CHECKLIST.md
- test-execution: TEST-PATTERNS.md, COVERAGE-GUIDE.md

skills/pr-creation/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: pr-creation
description: Create and manage GitHub Pull Requests with templates, reviewers, and labels. Use when code is ready for review. Merging requires explicit approval.
license: MIT
compatibility: Requires GitHub CLI (gh) and repository write access
metadata:
  author: ximplicity
  version: "1.0"
  category: git
---

# Pull Request Creation Skill

Create and manage Pull Requests on GitHub.

## Allowed Operations

- Create pull requests
- Update PR description
- Add reviewers
- Add labels
- Request reviews
- View PR status
- View PR comments

## Forbidden Operations

These require explicit approval:

- Merge PRs
- Close PRs without merging
- Delete branches after merge
- Force-approve PRs

## Constraints

- PRs must have a description
- PRs must reference issue/feature ID
- PRs should have at least one reviewer
- Use draft PRs for work-in-progress

## Quick PR Template

```markdown
## Summary

[Brief description of changes]

## Related Issue

Closes: PROJ-123

## Changes

- [Change 1]
- [Change 2]

## Testing

- [ ] Unit tests pass
- [ ] Integration tests pass
```

For complete templates, see [PR-TEMPLATES.md](references/PR-TEMPLATES.md).

For review guidelines, see [REVIEW-CHECKLIST.md](references/REVIEW-CHECKLIST.md).

## Dry-Run Mode

When `dryRun: true`:
- Validate all PR fields
- Check branch exists
- Verify reviewers exist
- Show PR preview
- Make NO API calls

## Linking

- Link to Jira issues using issue key
- Link to related PRs if applicable
- Reference relevant documentation

## Example Usage

```
Create a PR for branch feature/PROJ-123-login
Add reviewers @alice and @bob to PR #45
Update PR #45 description with test results
Show status of my open PRs
```
